The chief prosecutor at the International Criminal
Court has said he’s seeking arrest warrants
for Israeli leaders, including Prime Minister
Netanyahu, for their conduct of the war in Gaza.
Israeli politicians across the
spectrum have condemned the move.
The prosecutor has also applied for
warrants for key leaders of Hamas,
widely designated a terrorist organization.
My guest this week from Tel Aviv is Dennis Ross,
former special assistant to President Barack
Obama, and for more than 12 years a key player
in shaping US policy in the Middle East.
He’s not optimistic about what he sees now.
I can tell you this is worse between
Israelis and Palestinians than at any
point on which I worked on this issue,
including during the Second Intifada.
The ICC’s announcement comes at
a time when Israel’s human rights
record is under minute scrutiny, with
investigations by major media outlets
into violence by Jewish settlers.
Can a Palestinian state ever emerge
from so much conflict and hatred?
Dennis Ross, welcome to Conflict Zone.
Good to be with you.
Let's start with the announcement from
the chief prosecutor at the International
Criminal Court. Arrest warrants have never
been sought before for Israeli leaders,
and there's a storm of protest
not only from those named,
but from across all political factions in
Israel. What effect do you think that this
will have on Israel's conduct of the war if the
warrants are approved by pre-trial judges?
I don't think it'll have a positive effect. I
think it creates in the minds of most Israelis
across the political spectrum, that a moral
equivalence is being established between
those who came in with the expressed purpose of
deliberately killing innocents, kidnapping people
as young as nine months old, raping, just engaging
in unspeakable violence, brutality, and in a very
deliberate, determined way. And you're creating,
in a sense you're saying, you're treating them the
same as you're effectively treating the leaders
of a state who are responding to this kind of an
assault. There certainly are issues that I think
the prosecution is raising about the way the
Israelis have conducted the war. But most Israelis
will see this as creating a moral equivalence
where there is none. And I, in the absence of
that I think in terms of most Israelis will be
that they need to, they need to prosecute the war
and try to ensure that they've defeated Hamas in a
way. Because in a sense they're going to fear that
under no circumstances will they ever be seen as
being justified in terms of defending themselves
against these kinds of attacks. Whether that's
a correct perception [that] should exist or not.
That is the perception I'm afraid will exist here.
To be fair to the prosecutor, he didn't suggest
there was any moral equivalence. On the contrary,
he, the way that it's being explained by him and
by his officials, is that if evidence is brought
to him, prima facie evidence is brought to him.
of crimes committed on both sides of a conflict,
he has a duty to act and to pursue that evidence.
And this is one way in which he's doing it,
by seeking arrest warrants for those who have been
named. What other choice did he actually have?
Well, I think there is an interesting question
here in terms of timing because there was an
expectation he was going to visit Israel and
have discussions prior to coming out with this
and obviously he did not do that. It does strike
me that it might have been, again, just from a
practical, pragmatic standpoint, it might have
made more sense to be here in advance before he
issued these, but obviously he chose not to do
that. There's the panel he has is, I have to say
is a serious panel. I think the problem however
is I'm suggesting is by not having come here
before releasing this, I think it contributed to
the kind of very broad reaction, you have people
who are extremely critical of Prime Minister
Netanyahu who are also quite critical of this.
So a little bit more could have been done to set
the stage I suspect, but we are where we are.
If these very serious charges are not to be
tested by the ICC, where else would they be heard?
Again, it's not, it's not clear, but I think
there's a larger issue here that ought to be
kept in mind. And that is when you fight an enemy
that deliberately uses its civilian population not
just as a shield but really as a hostage, and
you're put in a position where, what are the
choices you have, not to go after them, given
what is going to be the civilian consequence
and therefore face this again or go after them and
unfortunately, there isn't going to be a civilian
consequence. Now, I will grant one of the things
that the Israelis should have done. I've made an
argument for this from the very beginning of the
war. They should have been much more forthcoming
with humanitarian assistance. They should have
gone out of their way to demonstrate this was an
effort to, an imperative to defeat Hamas and not
to punish the Palestinians who live in Gaza. And
Israel did not act in that way, and it made it
easier for those to portray what they're doing
in a way that is outside of what, outside the
bounds of acceptability. But is again the reality
is Israel was faced with a very cruel dilemma.
You have an enemy that carries not one width
for the well-being of its own public, is
quite ready to expose them, doesn't mind
if Israel kills a lot of Palestinians,
in fact seems to relish that prospect.
But this is what you what you seem to be outlining
is that this is a watershed moment
for international justice, isn't it?
I really do think there's a question here
about how we, we may have to redefine
international humanitarian law. I mean on
the one hand you still have an obligation to
try to minimize the casualties to civilian
non-combatants. That's an obligation that
shouldn't change. But how the tactics you can
use, how you go about doing that. How do you
create in a clear distinction between those who
are using human shields as a deliberate tactic
and those who have to contend with that. I
do think this is an issue that we're long
overdue trying to come to grips with how we
can better define international humanitarian
law given these kinds of non-state actors and
given their, the tactics that they employ.
Whatever system that you want to work towards
or you think that the international community
should work towards to provide some
kind of justice in situations like this,
we're not going to be able to live in a world
where accountability is reserved for enemies,
not friends. Isn't that the question that Gaza
is forcing everyone to consider, in its essence?
Well, I think, it is, at least in part. But I
don't think it's coming to grips with the question
I've been posing which is what is a legitimate
strategy for trying to root out an enemy,
a non-state actor, as it seems - if you're going
to have to have international humanitarian law,
it can't simply be one which says, ok you're
entitled to strike back, but you have to minimize
civilian casualties. What if it turns out that
the choice for minimizing civilian casualties is
quite limited. I mean there is something else that
could have been done. Something else that could
have been done is in a situation like this, maybe
international humanitarian law should say there
needs to be a period and there need to be areas
where people can be evacuated so they're not, as,
they're not as shields. I mean what separates,
for example, how the United States approached
Fallujah is that the people who lived in
Fallujah were actually allowed to leave.
In Iraq. In Iraq.
In Iraq, yes, they were allowed to leave. They
could, they could leave the city. The problem
here in Gaza, because it's so small, that they're
not allowed to leave, what one finds in every war
zone is that people leave. And look at Syria.
About five and a half million people left, fled
Syria. It wasn't a simple thing to do,
but five and a half million people left,
left Syria. In Gaza, the people are not allowed
to leave. So one of the, I think one of the
challenges for international humanitarian law
is to be able to come up with if you're trying
to protect the well-being of civilians, which is
a, it's not just a moral imperative, of course,
it's a moral imperative. It should be a political
imperative as well. But then one of the things you
have to come up with is strategies for evacuation
that the international community can facilitate
as a way of ensuring that if a war is being
fought against those who are using human shields,
at least the international community is
doing everything it can, not just in terms
of providing humanitarian assistance, but in
terms of getting them out of harm's way.
It hasn't been helped, the situation, has it, by
the fact that some of the reporting about Israel's
behavior by the administration in the [United]
States has been contradictory. On May the 10th,
the State Department wrote to Congress with its
most detailed assessment of Israel's conduct,
and it concluded that Israel had most likely
violated international standards in failing
to protect civilians in Gaza, but saying at the
same time it had not found specific instances
that would justify cutting military aid. The
department was immediately accused of a fudge,
Democratic Senator Chris Van Holland told
reporters “if this conduct complies with
international standards, then God help
us all”. He has a point, doesn't he?
Well, he does, but I guess I keep coming
back to the issue of international
standards. The international standards
have not adjusted to a reality where you
have an enemy that uses human shields.
So we end up judging the actor who has
been attacked as they then try to root
out those who are using human shields.
But how do you explain the apparent contradictions
in the State Department report, on the one handed
concludes that both action and inaction by
Israel had slowed the flow of aid into Gaza.
But on the other, it says “we don't currently
assess the Israeli government is prohibiting
or otherwise restricting the transport or
delivery of US humanitarian assistance into
the area.” In other words, slowing the aid
flow is not restricting it. Of course it is.
Look, I think what you what you have is that you
have really, I think you're raising two different
kinds of issues. One issue has to do with the use
of weapons. That's what you were first raising.
Now the second thing you're raising is the issue
of the permission of humanitarian assistance to
go in in the quantities that it should have
been permitted. On the former, I think what
the State Department was finding was that they
were looking at the totality of the people,
the numbers of people killed and said almost by
definition, we draw a conclusion that this must
have been done, force must have been done in a way
inconsistent with international humanitarian law.
On the other hand, we don't have specific
instances of what that was done. I can understand
that duality. The other issue you’re raising about
the permission, the provision of international,
of humanitarian assistance, I share that view. The
fact that it is not popular here with the Israeli
body politic who have suffered greatly from
October 7th and who every day see what Hamas
is doing by holding hostages, increasing numbers
of them no longer being alive and there the body
politic here is not feeling very sympathetic
to the Gazan population who they see somehow
being in league with Hamas. My own view is
the Gazan population is the victim of Hamas,
not in league with Hamas and Israel's
approach to the war needed to separate
Hamas from the population of Gaza.
Let's talk, if we may, about the state
of US-Israel relations. Are they now as bad as
you've known it during the course of your career?
I think it's... We're certainly at a low
point, but I wonder how much it's US-Israel
and [how much] it's just the leadership. I do
think that there is enormous frustration with
Prime Minister Netanyahu. I don't think
that extends necessarily to all Israelis
and not necessarily even to everyone in the
current government. But I do think there is
growing frustration with him. President Biden,
who's always had a good relationship with him,
I think has become very frustrated for a
variety of reasons. One is on a number of
occasions Prime Minister Netanyahu has
made promises to him and not fulfilled
those promises. And I think that has contributed
greatly to the frustration that he feels. Do I
think this is something that can be overcome
at least between the US and Israel? Yes,
because I don't see this necessarily as extending
to the two countries right now. I think there's
a problem between the two leaderships.
We'll have to see how that plays out.
On the limiting of weapons supplies to
Israel, you called it a mistake, what
the administration had done, saying it took all
the pressure off the Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar,
and pressure on him was the key to a
hostage deal. But President Biden is
someone who's all but accused Israelis of
war crimes by saying they've been bombing
indiscriminately. If he goes on giving them
those same American bombs to continue that
indiscriminate bombing, it makes him
look weak, doesn't it? And complicit.
Well, I think, you know, you can, I think you can
kind of present this however you choose to present
it. The fact is, I think he's trying to strike a
balance. He wants an outcome where Hamas, who not
only committed terrible atrocities on October 7th,
but continues to do it with the way it brutalizes
the hostages that it holds. There's almost seems
to be kind of international indifference to
what Hamas is doing to the hostages. Obviously
there's not that indifference here in Israel,
where for all the families, their life was frozen
on October 7th. In the case of President Biden,
he wants to be sure the outcome is an outcome
where Hamas is no longer in control of Gaza,
where Gaza can no longer be a platform for
attacks against Israel. And he's trying to
strike a balance between how do you achieve that
objective and at the same time conduct the war in
a way that tries to minimize the level of damage
and destruction done to the Palestinians who live
in Gaza. It's a very hard, very hard balance to
strike. One can, one can try to be pure in one
direction or the other but then you're not going
to achieve what is the most important objective.
I don't think the, it's very important to find a
way to end this war, but this war also needs to
end in a way where Hamas is not in a position
where it has any possibility of recouping.
Another reason surely for withholding weapons to
Israel is that American taxpayers are funding an
Israeli offensive that the majority of them
now appear to be against. Some of the latest
polls show 55% of Americans against 36% who
support Israel's conduct of the war. Don't
you think that the prospect is pretty worrying
for the Biden administration six months away
from a presidential election? Is
that one of their calculations?
I'm sure, all the things being equal, [if]
you're the president of the United States,
you're in an election year, this is an
issue that almost by definition is not
helpful. So you would undoubtedly like to
see this over as soon as possible and while,
and yet at the same time, while the president
wants to see this over as soon as possible,
he doesn't want an outcome where somehow Hamas is
able to recoup and re-establish itself. If it is,
this is not the last time we'll see this. Hamas
has shown not the slightest bit of interest in
developing Gaza, not the slightest bit of interest
in doing and providing well for the well-being of
its own public. It built 400 miles of tunnels
underground. All the materials that it did and
it used in in building those tunnels, all the
materials that it used in building a military
industrial base underground, all that could
have been used on the surface to advance Gaza
and the well-being of the people there, it did
none of that. And if it had a chance, it would
do this all over again. So you understand, of
course the president wants this over. It would
be much better for the president, especially
in an election year, if this was no longer an
issue. But he doesn't want it over in a way where
Hamas can do this again or it can reconstitute
itself and subject everybody, Palestinians and
Israelis alike, to another round like this.
This is also a time when Israel's human
rights record has been under some of
the most intense scrutiny, not least
because of multiple cases of settler
violence against Palestinians in the West
Bank. How concerned are you again that,
despite repeated international warnings about
that, very little has been done to curb it?
Well, look, I think one of the challenges
again with this Israeli government, you have
a couple of very extreme ministers, one of whom
is the Minister of National Security, Ben-Gvir,
and he often imes looks like he turns a blind eye
to what extremist settlers do. Israel presents
itself as a rule of law, and it has to act that
way. And with many of the extremist settlers,
including those right now who are trying to block
deliveries of assistance to Gaza. The law needs
to be enforced on them. There needs to be
more demonstration of that and if there isn't,
the administration is right to single out
and sanction some of those individuals.
A year-long investigation by the New
York Times, published in recent days,
claims to reveal how violent factions inside
the settler movement have been protected and
sometimes abetted by the Israeli government
and now pose a grave threat to Palestinians
in the occupied territories. We found the Times
said "a government shaken by an internal war,
burying reports it commissioned, neutering
investigations it assigned and silencing
whistleblowers, some of them senior
officials”. Did you know about this?
I did not.
Does any of it surprise you?
Over the years, I've always had a sense
that there was some protection. One of the
things that always was troubling is that it was
very hard to ever find the exact expenditures
on the whole settlement enterprise, as if the
Israeli government knew if it was exposed,
it would actually produce a reaction
within Israel. So I'm not surprised
at one level. The scope of it,
I have to say is surprising.
Mr. Ross, on the ground in Gaza, heavy fighting
around the southern city of Rafah despite the
strongest possible warnings from the US, has
Israel stopped listening to the White House?
The Biden administration said multiple
times it wanted to see a credible plan
for safeguarding civilians if the Rafah
offensive went ahead. By May the 15th,
at least, it was still saying it hadn't seen
such a plan. Is there anywhere a red line
which in the, which under no circumstances Israel
would be allowed to cross by the administration?
I think that the president has made that
clear that if they go into Rafah City,
that is a red line that's been crossed
without a credible evacuation plan.
With consequences. There would be consequences?
That's right. Well, there, Israel is operating
all around Rafah, but not within Rafah City. Now,
and right now about 800,000 people actually
have left. You still leave probably another 5
to 600,000 who are there. So they're still not
in the city. I think for the administration,
if they were to go into the city, there would be
consequences. I think the president, President
Biden is someone who when he says something,
he tends to mean it. So I suspect, and it's
one of the reasons I suspect the Israelis have
not gone in, is because that is something that
they understand is going to trigger a response and
with a price that they probably don't want to pay.
The Israeli Prime Minister has made it clear
that the prize of a Palestinian state is not
on offer to the Palestinians, particularly
after what Hamas has done. Is there any way
that a Palestinian state can, in your
view, emerge from all this conflict?
Well, not in the near term. First of all, the
Palestinians are divided between the West Bank and
Gaza. You're going to have to politically reunify
them. Look, I, my own view is the Palestinian
people have a right to self-determination and
whether that's a state, if they choose that's a
state or there's some kind of confederation, that
should be their choice. But by the same token,
with rights come responsibilities.
When we talk about a Palestinian state,
we can't have a Palestinian state that's going to
be led by Hamas. That's certainly not a two-state
solution. That's a guarantee for continuing war.
It can't be a Palestinian state that becomes a
member of the Axis of Resistance, what I call
the Axis of Misery, being aligned with Iran,
that's also a guarantee, that's a guarantee
against two states. It can't be a Palestinian
state that doesn't have institutions, so it'll be
a failed state. So you need, you need to create
rights and responsibilities. I would like to see
some benchmarks created, some milestones created,
all with the, all under the rubric that
Palestinians have a state in the making
and they have to fulfill their responsibilities to
be able to achieve their rights. Now, obviously,
at the same time, if you're creating that kind
of set of standards or milestones or obligations
on the Palestinian side, you have to impose some
responsibilities on the Israeli side, including
among other things, they cannot act on the ground
in the West Bank in a way that makes it impossible
to have a Palestinian state. But everything I've
just said, this is not something you can produce
overnight. We have to start by having both sides
even begin to cooperate in a functional way again,
And we're at a very low ebb. You asked me about
"was this as difficult a time as I've ever seen
in terms of US-Israeli relations?" I can tell you
this is worse between Israelis and Palestinians
than at any point on which I worked on this
issue, including during the Second Intifada.
So we have to get back to some kind of a baseline
so we can move from there and move in a direction
of peace becoming possible. Right now, we're not
dealing with a conflict that is seen in political
terms. We're seeing conflict that's almost seen
in existential terms and we're going to have to
get back to creating a sense of possibility
again, and we're quite a ways from that.
Can I just raise with you briefly the death in
a helicopter accident of the Iranian President
Raisi? Any sign of an opportunity or
a danger emerging from this accident?
I don't think it changes things very much. I
mean, it creates uncertainty within Iran. But the
Supreme Leader, Ali Khamenei, is a decision maker.
Raisi was not the decision maker. He might be the
decision implementer, but he wasn't the decision
maker. My guess is the Supreme Leader will
emphasize the importance of people participating
in the election because he likes to portray that
as being an indication of legitimacy. The fact
that turnouts are so small right now is an
indication of how the Iranian public really feels
about the Islamic Republic and the regime. But I
think in the near term, their focus will be
much more on trying to work out this election,
trying to maximize the numbers of people who
vote and much less adventures on the outside.
Dennis Ross, it's been good to
have you on Conflict Zone. Thank
you very much indeed for your time. Thank you.
Good to be with you.